Where?
Survey and Excavation of Sites
and Features
A major characteristic of archaeology is that it commonly
draws evidence from fieldwork, that is, from
survey and excavation. Traditionally, fieldwork was seen
almost exclusively in terms of the discovery and uncovering
of sites. Today, archaeologists are more aware of
the high cost and destructiveness of excavation, and so
while sites and their excavation remain of paramount
importance, site surface survey and subsurface detection
using non-destructive remote sensing devices
are now widely used. Indeed, some archaeological
projects may not include excavation at all, and instead
focus on various forms of survey. The use of non-invasive
survey not only leaves the archaeology undisturbed but
also helps to answer new questions. For example, the
study of entire landscapes by regional survey is now a
major part of archaeological fieldwork.
In archaeological fieldwork, we may distinguish
between the methods used in the discovery of archaeological
sites and non-site features or artifact scatters,
and those employed once those sites and features have
been discovered, which include detailed survey and
selective excavation at individual sites. It is important
to note that new evidence can often come from new
work at sites already the subject of fieldwork, such as Ian
Hodder’s renewal and reappraisal of the excavations of
the Turkish tell site of Çatalhöyük (see box, pp. 44–45).
Much potentially rich and rewarding material also lies
locked away in museum and institution vaults, waiting
to be analyzed by innovative modern techniques. Yet
it remains true that the great majority of archaeological
research is still dependent on the collection of new
material by fresh fieldwork.
Discovering Archaeological Sites
and Features
One major task of the archaeologist is to find and record
the location of sites and features. In this section we will
be reviewing some of the principal techniques used in site
discovery. But we should not forget that many monuments
have never been lost to posterity: the massive pyramids of
Egypt, or those of Teotihuacán near modern Mexico City,
have always been known to succeeding generations, as has
the Great Wall of China or many of the buildings in the
Forum in Rome. Their exact function or purpose may indeed
have aroused controversy down the centuries, but their
presence, the fact of their existence, was never in doubt.
Nor can one credit archaeologists with the discovery of
all those sites that were once lost. A signiﬁcant number of
sites known today were found by accident: the amazing
terracotta army of China’s ﬁrst emperor was unearthed in
1974 by farmers digging for a well; in France, the decorated
caves of Lascaux were stumbled upon in 1940 by teenagers,
and the underwater entrance to those of Cosquer
was discovered by a deep-sea diver in 1985. Countless
underwater wrecks have been spotted first by ﬁshermen,
sponge-gatherers, and sport-divers. Construction workers
building new roads, subways, dams, and ofﬁce blocks have
made their fair share of discoveries too for example, the
Templo Mayor (Great Temple) of the Aztecs in Mexico City
(see box, pp. 570 71).
Nevertheless, it is archaeologists who have systematically
attempted to record these sites, and it is archaeologists
who seek out the full range of sites and features, large or
small, that make up the great diversity of past landscapes.
How do they achieve this?
A practical distinction can be drawn between site discovery
conducted at ground level (ground reconnaissance)
and discovery from the air or from space (aerial survey),
although any one ﬁeld project will usually employ both
types of reconnaissance.

Ground Reconnaissance
Methods for identifying individual sites include consultation
of documentary sources and place-name evidence,
but primarily comprises actual fieldwork, whether the
monitoring ofbuilcling developers' progress in applied or
compliance archaeology (often known in the UK as salvage
or rescue archaeology), or survey in circumstances where
the archaeologist is more of a free agent.
Documentary Sources. We saw how Schliemann's firm
belief in the historical accuracy of the writings of Homer
led directly to the discovery of ancient Troy in Chapter 1.
In the 1960s, the location and excavation by Helge and
Anne Stine Ingstad of the VIking settlement of LJ\nse aux
Meadows in Newfoundland was similarly due in large
part to clues contained in medieval Viking sagas. Much
of modern biblical an::haeology concerns itself with the
search in the Near East for evidence of the places, people,
and events described in the Old and New Testaments.
Treated objectively as a possible source of information
about Near Eastern sites, the Bible can indeed be a rich
source of documentary material, but there is certainly the
danger that belief in the absolute religious truth of the
texts can cloud an impartial assessment of their archaeological
validity.
Much research in biblical archaeology involves attempting
to link named biblical sites with archaeologically
known ones. Place-name evidence, however, can also
lead to actual discoveries of new archaeological sites. In
southwest Europe, for example, many prehistoric stone
tombs have been found thanks to old names printed on
maps that incorporate local words for "stone" or "tomb."
Early maps and old street names are even more important
in helping archaeologists work out the former plans
of historic towns. In England, it is possible in the betterdocumented
medieval towns to map many of the streets,
houses, churches, and castles back to the twelfth century
cs, or even earlier, using this kind of evidence. Such maps
then form a reliable basis on which to decide where it
would be most profitable to carry out survey work and
excavation.
Cultural Resource Manageme nt and Applied or
Compliance Archaeology. In this specialized work (discussed
in Chapter 15), the role of the archaeologist is to
locate and record sites before they are destroyed by new
roads, buildings, or darns, or by peatcutting and drainage
in wetlands. In the USA a large number of sites are located
and recorded in inventories every year under cultural
resource management (CRM) laws, which were considerably
broadened and strengthened in the 1970s. Proper
liaison with the developer should allow archaeological
survey to take place in advance along the projected line of
road or in the path of development. Important sites thus
discovered may require excavation, and in some cases
can even cause construction plans to be altered. Certain
archaeological remains unearthed during the digging of
subways in Rome and Mexico City were incorporated into
station architecture.
In Britain, as in the USA, most excavations and surveys
are undertaken in the context of cultural resource management
the influence of the British "National Planning
Policy Framework" has meant that expenditure on archaeology
by developers has grown to more than £10 million
($15.4 million) annually.
Survey. How does the archaeologist set about locating sites,
other than through documentary sources and salvage work?
A conventional and still valid method is to look for the most
prominent remains in a landscape, particularly surviving
remnants of walled buildings, and burial mounds such as
those in eastern North America or Wessex in southern
England. But many sites are visible on the surface only as a
scatter of artifacts and so require more thorough survey
what we may call a "reconnaissance survey" to be detected.
In recent years, as archaeologists have become more
interested in reconstructing the full human use of the
landscape, they have begun to realize that there are very
faint scatters of artifacts that might not qualify as sites, but
which nevertheless represent signiﬁcant human activity.
Some scholars have suggested that these "off-site" or "nonsite"
areas (that is, areas with a low density of artifacts)
should be located and recorded, which can only be done
by systematic survey work involving careful sampling
procedures (see below). This approach is particularly
useful in areas where people leading a mobile way of life
have left only a sparse archaeological record, as in much
of Africa (see further discussion in Chapter 5).
Survey has become important for another major reason:
the growth of regional studies. Thanks to the pioneering
researches of scholars such as Gordon Willey in the Virú
Valley, Peru, and William T. Sanders (1926 2008) in the
Valley of Mexico, archaeologists increasingly seek to study
settlement patterns the distribution of sites across the
landscape within a given region. The signiﬁcance of this
work for the understanding of past societies is discussed
further in Chapter 5. Here we may note its impact on
archaeological ﬁeldwork: it is rarely enough now merely
to locate an individual site and then to survey it and/or
excavate it in isolation from other sites. Whole regions
need to be explored, involving a program of survey.
In the last few decades, reconnaissance survey has
developed from being simply a preliminary stage in
ﬁeldwork (looking for appropriate sites to excavate) to
a more or less independent kind of inquiry, an area of
research in its own right which can produce information
quite different from that achieved by digging. In some
cases, excavation may not take place at all, perhaps because
permission to dig was not forthcoming, or because of a
lack of time or funds modern excavation is slow and
costly, whereas survey is cheap, quick, relatively nondestructive,
and requires only GPS, maps, compasses,
and tapes. Usually, however, archaeologists deliberately
choose a surface approach as a source of regional data in
order to investigate speciﬁc questions that interest them
and that excavation could not answer.
Survey encompasses a broad range of techniques: no
longer just the identiﬁcation of sites and the recording
or collection of surface artifacts, but sometimes also the
sampling of natural and mineral resources such as stone
and clay. Much survey today is aimed at studying the
spatial distribution of human activities, variations between
regions, changes in population through time, and relationships
between people, land, and resources.
Survey in Practice. For questions formulated in regional
terms, it is necessary to collect data on a corresponding
scale in a way that provides the most information for the
least cost and effort. The region to be surveyed needs to be
deﬁned: its boundaries may be natural (such as a valley),
cultural (the extent of an artifact style), or purely arbitrary,
though natural boundaries are the easiest to establish.
The area’s history of development needs to be examined,
not only to familiarize oneself with previous archaeological
work and with the local materials but also to assess the
extent to which surface material may have been covered
or removed by natural processes. There is little point, for
example, in searching for prehistoric material in sediments
only recently laid down by river action. Other factors may
have affected surface evidence as well. In much of Africa,
for example, great animal herds or burrowing animals will
often have disturbed surface material, so that the archaeologist
may be able to examine only very broad distribution
patterns. Geologists and environmental specialists can
generally provide useful advice.
This background information will help determine the
intensity of surface coverage of the survey. Other factors
to take into consideration are the time and resources
available, and how easy it is actually to reach and record an
area. Arid and semi-arid environments with little vegetation
are among the best for this type of work; in equatorial
rainforest, survey may be limited to soil exposures along
river banks, unless time and labor permit the cutting
of trails to form a survey grid. Many regions, of course,
contain a variety of landscapes, and a single survey strategy
is often inadequate to cover them. Flexibility of approach
is required, with the area "stratiﬁed" into zones of differing
visibility, and an appropriate technique devised
for each. Moreover, it must be remembered that some
archaeological phases (with diagnostic artifacts) are more
"visible" than others, and that mobile hunter-gatherer or
pastoral communities leave a very different and generally
sparser imprint on the landscape than do agricultural or
urban communities (see Chapter 5). All these factors must
be taken into account when planning search patterns and
recovery techniques.
Another point to consider is whether material should
be collected or merely examined for its associations and
context (where context is disturbed, as in parts of Africa,
mentioned above, collection is often the most sensible
option). And should collection be total or partial? Usually,
a sampling method is employed (see box, p. 80).
There are two basic kinds of surface survey: the unsystematic
and the systematic. The former is the simpler,
involving walking across each part of the area, scanning
a strip of ground, collecting or examining artifacts on the
surface, and recording their location together with that
of any surface features. It is generally felt, however, that
the results may be biased and misleading. Walkers have an
inherent desire to ﬁnd material, and will therefore tend
to concentrate on those areas that seem richer, rather
than obtaining a sample representative of the whole area
that would enable the archaeologist to assess the varying
distribution of material of different periods or types. On
the other hand, the method is ﬂexible, enabling the team
to focus greater efforts on the areas that have proved most
likely to contain ﬁnds.
Most modern survey is done systematically, employing
either a grid system or a series of equally spaced traverses
or transects (straight paths) across the area. The area to be
searched is divided into sectors, and these (or a sample of
them) are walked. In this way, no part of the area is either
under- or overrepresented in the survey. This method also
communication. The work has also revealed former watercourses
and canals, and even probable zones of cultivation.
Alternatively, survey can be made more intensive
by aiming at total coverage of a single large site or sitecluster
what one might call "micro-regional" survey. It
is a paradox that some of the world’s greatest and most
famous archaeological sites have never, or only recently,
been studied in this way, since attention has traditionally
focused on the grandiose monuments themselves
rather than on any attempt to place them within even a
local context. At Teotihuacán, near Mexico City, a major
mapping project initiated in the 1960s has added hugely
to our knowledge of the area around the great pyramidtemples
(see pp. 97 and 100).
Surface survey has a vital place in archaeological work,
and one that continues to grow in importance. In modern
projects, however, it is usually supplemented (and often
preceded) by reconnaissance from above either from the
air or from space. In fact, the availability of aerial images
can be an important factor in selecting and delineating
an area for surface survey.
Aerial and Satellite Survey
Archaeological survey using airborne or spaceborne
remote sensing can be divided into two component parts:
data collecting, which comprises acquiring photographs or
images from aircraft, satellites, or UAVs (drones); and data
analysis, in which these images are analyzed, interpreted,
and (often) integrated with other evidence, such as may
be collected by ﬁeld survey, ground-based remote sensing,
or from documents. From the viewpoint of the photo interpreter
or image analyst, satellite images, multispectral/
hyperspectral data, and traditional aerial photographs are
all potentially useful sources, though they differ in scale
and resolution and carry different issues of interpretation.
These data will collectively be referred to as "aerial images."
Millions of aerial images have already been taken Many
are available for consultation in specialist libraries; a lesser
quantity is freely available online. Most result from "area
survey," in which aerial images are taken in overlapping
series to cover predeﬁned areas. A small number are taken
each year by archaeologists conducting prospective surveys
in light aircraft. It must be stressed that aerial images,
even those from prospective survey, are used for a wide
range of archaeological purposes, such as the discovery
and recording of sites, and the monitoring of changes in
them through time, or the photographing of buildings and
urban (and other) development in fact, recording almost
anything that "may not be there tomorrow." Nevertheless,
the taking and analysis of aerial images from aircraft or
satellite has led to a large number of archaeological discoveries,
and the tally grows every year.
How Are Aerial Images Used? Images taken from the air
are merely tools; they are a means to an end. Images do
not themselves reveal sites it is the image taker and
the interpreter who do so, by examination of the terrain
and the pictures. These are specialized skills. Experience
and a keen eye are needed to differentiate archaeological
traces from other features such as vehicle tracks, old
riverbeds, and patterns produced by modern cultivation
a process that benefits from a broad understanding of
landscape history, including an awareness of contemporary
processes.
Aerial images are of two types: oblique and vertical. Each
has its advantages and drawbacks, but oblique images
have usually been taken of sites observed from the air
by an archaeologist and thought to be of archaeological
signiﬁcance, whereas most vertical images result from
non-archaeological surveys (for instance, cartographic
surveys). Both types of image can be used to provide overlapping
stereoscopic pairs of prints that enable a scene to
be examined in three dimensions and so add conﬁdence
to any interpretation. Stereoscopic pictures taken of the
ancient city of Mohenjodaro in Pakistan from a tethered
balloon, for example, have enabled photogrammetric
(accurately contoured) plans to be made of its surviving
structures. Similarly, large areas can be surveyed with
overlapping images, which are then processed into a very
accurate photographic base map of all the archaeological
evidence visible from the air. Such images are a useful tool
to inform analytical ground survey.
The ways in which sites show from the air and how they
are interpreted are discussed in the box overleaf. Oblique
images are often targeted on archaeological features that
may show clearly, while vertical images may need to be
more thoroughly examined by an interpreter seeking such
information. Both types of image can be rectiﬁed and
georeferenced using computer programs. This removes
the scale and perspective distortions of oblique images
and can correct for tilt and off-nadir distortion in vertical
views. Use of a digital terrain model (making a 3D model
of the ground based on contours or via LIDAR or ALS
data see below) in the rectiﬁcation process produces
greater accuracy where the ground is undulating or has
high relief. After computer transformation, the resulting
image may be layered in graphics software or a GIS (see pp.
94 97) and interpreted by overdrawing the archaeological
features that have been identiﬁed. Site-speciﬁc mapping at
scales of 1:2,500 can show considerable detail within a site
and can be accurate to less than ± 1 m (± 3 ft.). This allows
features to be measured and compared and is essential in
providing precise locations so that excavation trenches
can be positioned accurately and cost-effectively (see box,
p. 88 89). This is the usual method for interpreting and
mapping archaeological features from aerial images in
Britain and Europe and could be a useful tool elsewhere.
Mapping of individual sites from aerial photographs is
often necessary in research or salvage (rescue) archaeology
and also forms the foundations of landscape mapping
and understanding. The ability to study large areas is often
only possible using aerial resources. In Britain, Rog Palmer
used thousands of individual photographs of a 450-sq. km
(175-sq. mile) territory around the Iron Age hillfort of
Danebury in Hampshire to produce accurate maps. These
show that the site lay within very complex agricultural
landscapes, with at least eight other hillforts in the area.

set of "orthophotos~ geometrically corrected images
representing an exact likeness of the earth that can later
be georeferenced and used for making accurate drawings.
One recent experiment run by Jesse Casana and
his colleagues used a drone carrying optical and thermal
cameras to record parts of the Chaco-period (900 u 8o
CE) Blue I site in New Mexico. Flights followed a predetermined
course synchronized with times of day when
thermal responses were expected from different ground
features. Images from each sensor were combined to
produce an orthophoto mosaic that was tied to ground
control points and could be precisely compared with
others. The Blue J site is well known from ground and
other survey, thus providing a good test environment
for the method. The thermal imagery did reveal almost
3.19 A Cha co-period house compound at Blue J, New Mexico. Thermal
imagery collected by a drone at 5 :18A.M. (upper left) reveals a
roomblock, e nclosure wall, and plaza area, all of wh ich have been
confirmed by conventional survey and test excavation (upper right).
These features are not visible in a color photograph (center left), and are
difficult to see through vegetation noise in thermal imagery from 9:50 P.M.
(center right) or 6:18A.M. (bottom right). Thermal imagery collected just
after sunrise at 7:18 A.M. (bottom left) reveals the subtle topography of
the house compound.
Enclosure
wall
N i
.... .1 ·
3.10 The earthworks of the later prehistoric settlement at Braidwood, in
southern Scotla nd, were documented by Historic Environment Scotland
with photographs taken from a drone. lmage-based mode ling software
fi rst geometrically corrected the photographs to the appropriate scale
and aligned them with a spare point cloud of coordinates of the landscape
(top left). Texture was then added from the photos (top right). Finally,
a dense point cloud of coordinates (bottom left) was used t o produce a
multi-d irection hillshade model (bottom right).
all the known archaeological features, suggesting that it
could prove a useful tool in areas where similar remains
might be expected.
LIDAR and SLAR. Use of LIDAR (light detection and
ranging) also known asALS (airborne laser scanning)
has proved extremely valuable in the past few years. This
technique uses an aircraft, the exact position of which
is known through use of a differential GPS, carrying a
laser scanner that rapidly pulses a series of beams to the
ground. By measuring the time taken for these to return
to the aircraft, an accurate 3D "point cloud" is created,
which can be processed to produce precise digital elevation
models (or digital surface models: DSMs) and a wide range
of different visualizations of the data. LIDAR provides
archaeologists with two great advantages over conventional
aerial photography: tree canopies can be eliminated
where the laser is able to penetrate to the ground surface
through gaps in the vegetation; and the 3D terrain models
can be visualized in many ways, simply by moving the angle
and azimuth of the sun to enable ground features to be
viewed under optimal (and sometimes naturally impossible)
lighting. Both facilities have been used effectively
in England where new sites mostly enlargements to
field systems have been found, and locational corrections
made to the existing record of the landscape around
Stonehenge. A good example of the practical application
of LIDAR to an archaeological site comes from the Maya
city of Caracol in Belize (see box, p. 88). One variant of
ALS, green LIDAR, can penetrate shallow water and has

successfully been used to identify and record submerged
remains in parts of the Mediterranean Sea.
Another remote sensing technique, sideways-looking
airborne radar (SLAR), has yielded evidence suggesting
that Maya agriculture was more intensive than previously
imagined. The technique involves recording in radar
images the return of pulses of electromagnetic radiation
sent out from a ﬂying aircraft. Since radar will penetrate
cloud cover and to some extent dense rainforest, Richard
Adams and his colleagues were able to use SLAR from a
high-ﬂying NASA aircraft to scan 80,000 sq. km (31,200
sq. miles) of the Maya lowlands. The SLAR images
revealed not only ancient cities and ﬁeld systems but
also an enormous lattice of gray lines, some of which may
have been canals, to judge by subsequent inspections by
canoe. If ﬁeld testing reveals that the canals are ancient,
it will show that the Maya had an elaborate irrigation and
water-transport system.
Satellite Imagery and Google Earth. It is now routine
to access Google Earth and use the high-resolution air
photos and satellite cover there, or to buy copies of them.
For example, a desert camp used by Lawrence of Arabia
in World War I (1918) was recently located in Jordan as
a result of Google Earth being used to examine a likely
location shown in contemporary photographs.
The high-resolution images publicly available from the
IKONOS (about 1 m, 3 ft., resolution) and QuickBird
(60 cm, 24 in.) satellites offer data comparable with
aerial photographs, while Google Earth has basic world
cover from NASA’s LANDSAT series (28.5 m, 94 ft.)
but also incorporates IKONOS, QuickBird, and GeoEye
images, some other satellite imagery, and conventional
aerial photographs. IKONOS and QuickBird provide
both multispectral (MS) and panchromatic (PAN) highresolution
imagery in which such details as buildings are
easily visible. The imagery can be imported into remote
sensing image-processing software, as well as into GIS
packages for analysis.
Some useful early work was done using images from
the LANDSAT series. Scanners record the intensity of
reﬂected light and the infrared radiation from the earth’s
surface, and convert these electronically into photographic
images. LANDSAT images have been used to
trace large-scale features such as ancient levee systems in
Mesopotamia and an ancient riverbed running from the
deserts of Saudi Arabia to Kuwait, as well as sediments
around Ethiopia’s Rift Valley that are likely to contain
hominin fossil beds.
The introduction of Google Earth has been a true "aerial
revolution," since it offers every archaeologist the opportunity
to examine the ground and look for archaeological
sites for example, it is being used by paleontologists in
Africa to hunt for fossils; in 2008 it revealed 500 new caves
in South Africa alone, including the one that yielded the
bones of Australopithecus sediba (see p. 167). Hundreds of
new archaeological sites in Afghanistan and thousands of
tombs in Saudi Arabia are also being discovered by this
method. But the same "rules" of visibility apply to those
images as to conventional aerial photos, and absence of

capability for the creation of digital elevation models. As
the best ground resolution is 15 m (50 ft.), ASTER is useful
for examination of terrain rather than for detecting sites,
unless they are very large, such as the tell settlements
typical in the Middle East.
The European Space Agency’s Sentinel-2 comprises
two satellites capable of recording locations in the globe’s
mid-latitudes every two to three days using multispectral
sensors. Images are added to the ESA’s website and can be
used to monitor crop development to help select optimal
dates for commissioning higher-resolution aerial cover
or to check vegetation cover prior to field survey visits.
Satellite remote sensing projects carried out by archaeologists
with backgrounds in both remote sensing and
archaeology have much to offer, but satellite archaeology
should not be regarded as a substitute for archaeological
excavation or survey work. It is just one among a number
of tools that archaeologists may want to employ in their
research. Besides revealing the presence of (sub)surface
archaeological features (even in areas previously surveyed),
satellite remote sensing can place archaeological sites in
a much larger context, showing past social landscapes
in all their complexity and helping greatly with quality
assessment. Analysis of satellite imagery may further aid
archaeologists in determining where to excavate and may
precede archaeological survey. Archaeologists will need
to persist in rethinking their surveying and excavation
strategies in light of this new information, especially as
image resolution continues to increase with technological
advances.
Recording and Mapping Sites in Survey
As already noted in the discussion of aerial survey, the
pinpointing of sites and features on regional maps is an
essential next step in survey. To have discovered a site is
one thing, but only when it has been adequately recorded
does it become part of the sum total of knowledge about
the archaeology of a region.
Mapping is the key to the accurate recording of most
survey data. For surface features, such as buildings and
roads, both topographic and planimetric maps are used.
Topographic maps represent differences in elevation or
height by means of contour lines and help relate ancient
structures to the surrounding landscape. Planimetric
maps exclude contour lines and topographic information,
concentrating instead on the broad outlines of features,
therefore making it easier, for example, to understand
the relationship of different buildings to each other. On
some site maps the two techniques are combined, with
natural relief depicted topographically and archaeological
features planimetrically.
In addition to plotting a site on a map including its
exact latitude, longitude, and map grid reference (or a
metric UTM reference) proper recording entails giving
the site some kind of locational designation and entering
this on a site record form, along with information
about who owns the site, its condition, and other details.
Locational designations vary in different parts of the world.
In the United States, they usually consist of a two-digit
number for the state, a pair of letters for the county, and
a number indicating that this is the nth site discovered in
that county. Thus site 36WH297 designates the 297th site
discovered in Washington County (WH), in the state of
Pennsylvania (36). This is the locational designation for
the famous Paleoamerican Meadowcroft Rockshelter.
One of the great values of designating sites using
these alphanumerical systems is that the information
can be entered easily on computer ﬁles, for quick
data retrieval, for example in salvage archaeology or
settlement-pattern studies.

The standard approach to archaeological mapping is
now the use of GIS (geographic information systems),
described in one official report as "the biggest step forward
in the handling of geographic information since the invention
of the map." GIS are collections of computer hardware
and software and of geographic data, designed to obtain,
store, manage, manipulate, analyze, and display a wide
range of spatial information. They combine a database
with powerful digital mapping tools, and developed out
of computer-aided design and mapping (CAD/CAM)
programs during the 1970s. Some CAD programs, such
as AutoCAD, can be linked to commercial databases and
have proved valuable in allowing the automatic mapping
of archaeological sites held in a computer database. A true
GIS, however, also incorporates the ability to carry out
a statistical analysis of site distribution, and to generate
new information. Given information about slope and distance,
for example, a GIS can also be used for cost-surface
analysis, mapping catchment areas and site territories,
taking the surrounding terrain into account. Here, the
software and digital landscape information are fed into
a computer, along with (as a standard measurement) the
figure of one hour for a 5-km (3-mile) walk on the flat. The
software then does the calculations, using built-in data on
the energy cost of traversing different kinds of terrain.
Therefore GIS have applications far beyond recording and
mapping, and we shall return to their analytical capabilities
in Chapters 5 and 6.
A GIS will hold information on the location and attributes
of each site or point recordecl Spatial data can be
reduced to three basic types: point, line, and polygon (or
area). Each of these units can be stored along with an
identifying label and a number of non-spatial attributes,
such as name, date, or material. A single archaeological
find might therefore be represented by an easting
and northing coordinate and a find number, while an
ancient road would be recorded as a string of coordinate
pairs and its name. A field system could be defined as
strings of coordinates following each field boundary, along
with reference names or numbers. Each map (sometimes
described in a GIS as a '1ayer" or"coverage") may comprise
a combination of points, lines, and polygons, togetherwi th
their different non-spatial attributes.
Within a map layer, the data may be held in vector
format, as points, lines, and polygons, or they may be
stored as a grid of cells, or raster format (see ill. 3.42).
A raster layer recording vegetation, for example, would
comprise a grid within which each cell contains information
on the vegetation present at that point. Nowadays,
most commercial systems will allow these different data
structures to be mixed.
A GIS may include an enormous amount of environmental
data on relief, communications, hydrology, etc.
To make all this information easier to handle, it is normal
to divide it into different map layers, each representing
a single variable. Archaeological data may themselves
be split into several layers, most often so that each layer
represents a discrete "time-slice". As long as they can
be spatially located, many different types of data can be
integrated in a GIS. These can include site plans, artifact
distributions, aerial images, and geophysica I survey results,
as well as maps. A good example of many different types
of data being incorporated into a GIS is the Giza Plateau
Mapping Project in Egypt (see box pp. 94 95).
The ability to incorporate aerial images into a GIS can
be particularly valuable for site reconnaissance as they can
provide detailed and current land-use information. Many
topographic data already exist in the form of digital maps
which can be taken directly into a GIS. Knowing exact
ground coordinates is essential in archaeological practice

An example developed by the Illinois State Museum
for the Shawnee National Forest in southern Illinois predicts
the likelihood of ﬁnding a prehistoric site anywhere
within the 91 sq. km (35 sq. miles) of the forest by using the
observed characteristics of the sixty-eight sites, which are
known from the 12 sq. km (4.6 sq. miles) that have been
surveyed. A GIS database was constructed for the entire
area including data themes for elevation, slope, aspect,
distance to water, soil type, and depth to the water table.
The characteristics of the known sites were compared with
the characteristics of the locations known not to contain
sites using a statistical procedure known as "logistic regression,"
a probability model resulting in an equation that
can be used to predict the probability that any location
with known environmental characteristics will contain
a prehistoric site.
The potential value of predictive modeling with GIS has
also become apparent outside North America, particularly
in the Netherlands and in Britain. Such models can be of
value both in understanding the possible distribution of
archaeological sites within a landscape, and also for the
protection and management of archaeological remains in
cultural resource management (see Chapter 15).
Many GIS applications, especially those based on
predictive modeling, have been criticized as being environmentally
deterministic, and it is easy to see why. Such
data as soil types, rivers, altitude, and land use can be measured,
mapped, and converted into digital data, whereas
cultural and social aspects of landscape are much more
problematic. In an attempt to escape from these more
functionalist analyses, archaeologists have used the GIS
function called viewsheds to try to develop more humanistic
appreciations of landscape (see box pp. 186 87, and
main text pp. 185 and 191).
Assessing the Layout of Sites
and Features
Finding and recording sites and features is the ﬁrst stage
in ﬁeldwork, but the next stage is to make some assessment
of site size, type, and layout. These are crucial factors
for archaeologists, not only for those who are trying to
decide whether, where, and how to excavate, but also for
those whose main focus may be site management or the
study of settlement patterns, site systems, and landscape
archaeology without planning any recourse to excavation.
We have seen how aerial images may be used to locate
and plot the layout of sites. What are the other main
methods for investigating sites without excavating them?
Site Surface Survey
The simplest way to gain some idea of a site’s extent and
layout is through a site surface survey by studying the
distribution of surviving features, and recording and possibly
collecting artifacts from the surface.
The Teotihuacán Mapping Project, for instance, used
site surface survey to investigate the layout and orientation
of the city, which was the largest and most powerful
urban center in Mesoamerica in its heyday from 200
to 650 ce. The layout and orientation of the city had
intrigued scholars for decades; however, they considered
the grandiose pyramid-temples, plazas, and the major
avenue an area now known as the ceremonial center to
be the entire extent of the metropolis. It was not until the
survey conducted by the Teotihuacán Mapping Project
that the outer limits, the great east west axis, and the grid
plan of the city were discovered and deﬁned. Fortunately,
structural remains lay just beneath the surface, so that
the team were able to undertake the mapping from a
combination of aerial and surface survey, with only smallscale
excavation to test the survey results. Millions of
potsherds were collected, and more than 5,000 structures
and activity areas recorded. Since 1980, a team
from the Mexican Institute of Archaeology and History
(INAH) has been enlarging the picture so successfully
established by the Teotihuacán project survey. Other teams
employed geophysical methods to map a system of caves
and tunnels used for extracting construction material, as
well as for burials and rituals. Magnetometer and resistivity
surveys (see pp. 102 3), undertaken by a team from the
National Autonomous University of Mexico led by Linda
Manzanilla, were used to create a 3D reconstruction of
subsurface contours.
For artifacts and other objects collected or observed
during surface survey, it may not be worth mapping their
individual locations if they appear to come from badly
disturbed secondary contexts. Or there may simply be too
many artifacts realistically to record all their individual
proveniences. In this latter instance, the archaeologist
will probably use sampling procedures for the selective
recording of surface ﬁnds. Where time and funds are
sufﬁcient and the site is small enough, however, collection
and recording of artifacts from the total site area may
prove possible. For example, Frank Hole and his colleagues
picked up everything from the entire surface of a 1.5-ha
(3.7-acre) open-air prehistoric site in the Valley of Oaxaca,
Mexico, plotting locations using a grid of 5-m (16-ft.)
squares. They transformed the results into maps with
contour lines indicating not differences in elevation but
relative densities of various types of materials and artifacts.
It then became clear that, although some objects (such as
projectile points) were evidently in a secondary context

Subsurface Detection
Probes. The most traditional technique is that of probing
the soil with rods or augers and noting the positions where
they strike solids or hollows. Metal rods with a T-shaped
handle are the most common, but augers large corkscrews
with a similar handle are also used, and have
the advantage of bringing samples of soil to the surface,
clinging to the screw. Many archaeologists routinely use
handheld probes that yield small, solid cores. Probing
of this type was used, for example, to gauge the depth
of the midden at the Ozette site in Washington State
(pp. 60 61) and by Chinese archaeologists to plot the
hundreds of pits remaining to be investigated near the
ﬁrst emperor’s famous buried terracotta army. In the mid-
1980s, the American archaeologist David Hurst Thomas
and his team used more than 600 systematically spaced
test probes with a gasoline-powered auger in their successful
search for a lost sixteenth-century Spanish mission on
St. Catherine’s Island off the coast of Georgia in the US.
Augers are also used by geomorphologists studying site
sediments. However, there is always a risk of damaging
fragile artifacts or features.
One notable advance in this technique was developed
by Carlo Lerici (1890 1981) in Italy in the 1950s as part
of the search for Etruscan tombs of the sixth century bce.
Having detected the precise location of a tomb through
aerial photography and soil resistivity (see below), he
would bore down into it a hole 8 cm (3 in.) in diameter,
and insert a long tube with a periscope head and light,
with a tiny camera attached if needed. Lerici examined
some 3,500 Etruscan tombs in this way, and found that
almost all were completely empty, saving future excavators
a great deal of wasted effort. He also discovered more than
twenty with painted walls, therefore doubling the known
heritage of Etruscan painted tombs at a stroke.
Probing the Pyramids. Modern technology has taken this
kind of work even further, with the development of the
endoscope (see Chapter 11) and miniature TV cameras.
In a project reminiscent of Lerici, a probe was carried out
in 1987 of a boat pit beside the Great Pyramid of Khufu
(Cheops), in Egypt. This lies adjacent to another pit, excavated
in 1954, which contained the perfectly preserved and
disassembled parts of a 43-m (141-ft.) long royal cedarwood
boat of the third millennium bce (see p. 334). The 1987
probe revealed that the unopened pit did indeed contain
all the dismantled timbers of a second boat. In 2008 a
team from Waseda University inserted a second miniature
camera to re-examine the boat’s condition and ascertain
whether it could be safely lifted. The covering stone blocks
and the boat’s timbers were duly removed in 2011.
Robot probes with miniature cameras have been sent up
the so-called "airshafts" of the Great Pyramid to discover
whether or not they link up to hidden chambers. For
example, the Pyramid Rover was able to reach and drill
through a previously discovered stone slab blocking one of
these shafts, revealing another doorway behind. Further

probes have been used by French and Japanese teams
who believe the Pyramid may contain as yet undiscovered
chambers or corridors; using ultrasensitive microgravimetric
equipment normally employed to search for
deﬁciencies in dam walls, as it can tell if a stone has a
hollow behind it they detected what they think is a cavity
some 3 m (10 ft.) beyond one of the passage walls. Test
drilling to support this claim, however, has not been completed.
All tests are carefully monitored by the Egyptian
authorities until their potential contribution to Egyptology
has been established. Projects of this kind are beyond the
resources of most archaeologists. But in future, funds permitting,
probes of this type could equally well be applied
to other Egyptian sites, to cavities in Maya structures, or
to the many unexcavated tombs in China.
Ground-Based Remote Sensing
Probing techniques are useful, but inevitably involve some
disturbance of the site. There is, however, a wide range
of non-destructive techniques ideal for the archaeologist
seeking to learn more about a site before or increasingly
often without excavation. These are geophysical
sensing devices that measure energies and properties in
the soil in order to "read" what lies below the surface.
These energies and properties may be natural magnetism
and gravity, or waves passed through the soil manually by
the archaeologist.
Seismic and Acoustic Methods. Some types of echo-sounding,
such as sonar, have been employed in archaeology. For
example, detection of anomalies can ﬁnd cavities such as
caves. Seismic methods normally used by oil prospectors
have helped to trace details of the foundations of St. Peter’s
Basilica in the Vatican in Rome.
One of the most important archaeological applications
of echo-sounding techniques, however, is in underwater
projects (see box p. 114). In one case, after a bronze statue
of an African boy was brought up in a sponge-diver’s net
off the Turkish coast, George Bass and his colleagues were
able to locate the Roman ship from which it came by means
of echo-location systems. The use of multibeam sonar can
gather huge amounts of data from wreck sites for the creation
of 3D terrain models; it covers the seabed below and
to either side of the survey vessel, and derives continuous
and well-positioned spot heights for thousands of points
on the seabed as the vessel moves forward.
Electromagnetic Methods. A basically similar method,
which employs not sonic but radio pulses, is groundpenetrating
(or probing) radar (GPR). An emitter sends
short pulses through the soil, and the echoes not only
reﬂect back any changes in the soil and sediment conditions
encountered, such as ﬁlled ditches, graves, walls,
etc., but also measure the depth at which the changes
occur on the basis of the travel time of the pulses. Threedimensional
maps of buried archaeological remains can
then be produced from data-processing and image-generation
programs.
In archaeological exploration and mapping, the
antenna is towed by a vehicle or dragged manually along
the ground, sending out and receiving many pulses per
second. The measurements are collated into a 3D model.
One advance of such models is the use of "time-slices"
or "slice-maps." Thousands of individual reﬂections are
combined into a single three-dimensional dataset which
can then be "sliced" horizontally, each slice corresponding
to a speciﬁc estimated depth in the ground, and revealing
the general shape and location of buried features at successive
depths. For example, in the Forum Novum, an ancient
Roman marketplace located about 100 km (60 miles)
north of Rome, British archaeologists from the University
of Birmingham and the British School of Archaeology in
Rome needed a fuller picture of an unexcavated area than
they had been able to obtain from aerial photographs and
other techniques such as resistivity (see below). A series
of GPR slices of the area revealed a whole architectural
layout of the site which means that future excavation can
be concentrated on a representative sample of the structures,
avoiding a costly and time-consuming uncovering
of the whole area.
Parts of the fourth-largest Roman city in England, that
of Wroxeter in Shropshire (see box pp.104 5), have been
studied by GPR as well as other geophysical methods;
"time-slices" from different depths have revealed the
town’s changing history through 400 years.
In Japan, a burial mound at Kanmachi Mandara of
about 350 ce was protected from excavation by cultural
property laws, so GPR was used to locate the burial area
within the mound, and determine its structural design.
Radar proﬁles were taken at 50-cm (20-in.) intervals across
the mound, with pulses that could penetrate about 1 m
(3 ft.) into the ground.
Earth Resistance Survey. A commonly used method that
has been employed on archaeological sites for several
decades, is electrical resistivity. The technique derives from
the principle that the wetter the soil the more easily it will
conduct electricity, i.e. the less resistance it will show to an
electric current. A resistivity meter attached to electrodes
in the ground can therefore measure varying degrees of
subsurface resistance to a current passed between the
electrodes. Silted-up ditches or ﬁlled-in pits retain more
moisture than stone walls or roads and will therefore
display lower resistivity than stone structures.
The technique works particularly well for ditches and
pits in chalk and gravel, and masonry in clay. Two "mobile"
probes, ﬁxed to a frame that also supports the meter, are
inserted into the earth for each reading. A variation of the

method is resistivity profiling, which involves the measurement
of earth resistance at increasing depths across a site,
by widening the probe spacings and so building up a vertical
"pseudosection." Today, in areas where other forms of
survey do not produce good contrasts, a combination of
multiple profiles across a site is used to create 3D images
of buried surfaces (and "time-slices" comparable to those
produced for GPR data).
One drawback of earth resistance survey is that it is
rather slow due to the need to make electrical contact
with the soil. Mobile earth resistance systems, with probe
arrays mounted on wheels, have been developed by French
and British geophysicists to increase the speed of survey
coverage. Another drawback is that as with such other
techniques it will not fully function if the soil is too
hard or too dry, and that it is at its most effective on
shallow, single-phase sites rather than deep, complex
sites. Nevertheless, the method is an effective complement
to other remote sensing survey methods. Indeed, it
can replace magnetic methods (see below) since, unlike
some of these, it can be used in some urban areas, close
to power lines, and in the vicinity of ferrous metal. Many
things detectable by magnetism can also be found by earth
resistance; and in some ﬁeld projects it has proved the
most successful device for locating features. Techniques
based on magnetism are, however, of potentially greater
importance to archaeologists.
Magnetic Survey Methods. These are among the most
widely used methods of survey, being particularly helpful
in locating ﬁred clay structures such as hearths and pottery
kilns, iron objects, and pits and ditches. Such buried features
all produce slight but measurable distortions in the
earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. The reasons for this vary according
to the type of feature, but are based on the presence of
magnetic minerals, even if only in minute amounts. For
example, grains of iron oxide in clay, their magnetism
randomly orientated if the clay is unbaked, will line up
and become permanently ﬁxed in the direction of the
earth’s magnetic ﬁeld when heated to about 200 400 °C
(370 740 °F) or more. The baked clay therefore becomes
a weak permanent magnet, creating an anomaly in the
surrounding magnetic ﬁeld. (This phenomenon of thermoremanent
magnetism, or TRM, also forms the basis
for magnetic dating see Chapter 4.) Anomalies caused
by pits and ditches, on the other hand, occur because
the so-called magnetic susceptibility of their contents is
greater than that of the surrounding subsoil. "Magnetic
susceptibility" is the ability of some materials that are not
permanently magnetized to enhance the strength of an
externally generated magnetic field, such as the earth’s,
where it passes through them.
All the magnetic instruments can produce informative
site plans, which help to delimit archaeological potential
(see box, p. 106). The commonest means of presentation
are color and grayscale maps, which, along with contour
maps, are used to display earth resistance survey results. In
the case of magnetic survey, the contour map has contour
lines that join all points of the same value of the magnetic
ﬁeld intensity this successfully reveals separate anomalies,
such as tombs in a cemetery.
New developments in image processing by computer
make it possible to manipulate geophysical datasets in
order to reduce spurious effects and highlight subtle
archaeological anomalies. For example, "directional
ﬁltering" allows a data "surface" of any chosen vertical
scale to be "illuminated" from various directions and
elevations to make subtle anomalies more visible. Such
processing mimics the revealing effects of low sunlight
on earthworks, but with the added ﬂexibility of computer
manipulation.
Today, multiple types of sensors both electromagnetic
and magnetic are often integrated on moving
platforms or "mobile arrays," which allows for simultaneous
measurements.
Metal Detectors. These electromagnetic devices are also
helpful in detecting buried remains. An alternating magnetic
ﬁeld is generated by passing an electrical current
through a transmitter coil. Buried metal objects distort
this ﬁeld and are detected as a result of an electrical signal
picked up by a receiver coil.
Metal detectors can be of great value to archaeologists,
particularly as they can provide general results and are
able to locate modern metal objects that may lie near the
surface. They are also very widely used by non-archaeologists,
most of whom are responsible enthusiasts, but
some of whom vandalize sites mindlessly and often illegally
dig holes without recording or reporting the ﬁnds
they make, which are therefore without context. There
are now 30,000 metal detectorists in Britain alone. The
ofﬁcial British Portable Antiquities Scheme (see box,
p. 575) seeks to harness their enthusiasm for archaeological
beneﬁt. One of the great successes of recent years of the
Portable Antiquities Scheme has been the discovery by an
amateur detectorist of the remarkable Staffordshire hoard
of Anglo-Saxon gold and silver metalwork (see ill. 3.56).
Geochemical Analysis. Geochemical analysis involves
taking samples of soil at intervals (such as every 1 m, or
3 ft.) from the surface of a site and its surroundings, and
measuring their elemental content. In the past, topsoil
was considered to be too disturbed and unstratiﬁed, and
so devoid of archaeological information; it was often
removed mechanically and quickly, without investigation.
Now, it is clear that even the surface of an archaeological
site that appears totally disturbed can yield important
chemical information. Organic components of occupation
debris may disappear, while the inorganic ones remain:
of these, magnesium or calcium can be analyzed, but it
is the phosphates that are the most diagnostic and easily
identiﬁed. High phosphate concentrations may be the
only surface sign of an archaeological site. Tests on sites
in England, examining samples taken at 20-cm (8-in.)
intervals from the surface downward, have conﬁrmed that
undisturbed archaeological features in the subsoil can be
accurately reﬂected in the topsoil.
The phosphate method can also be valuable for the
interpretation of sites with no apparent internal architectural
features, and can help clarify the function of
different parts of an excavated site. For example, in a
Romano-British farmstead at Cefn Graeanog, North Wales,
J. S. Conway took soil samples at 1-m (3-ft.) intervals from
the ﬂoors of excavated huts and from neighboring ﬁelds,
and mapped their phosphorus content as contour lines. In
one building, a high level of phosphorus across the middle
implied the existence of two animal stalls with a drain for
urine running between them. In another, the position of
two hearths was marked by high readings.
Geochemical methods can also reveal what processes
or activities were being carried out in the past. Portable
infrared spectrometers first appeared in the late 1980s,
and today portable instruments such as X-ray fluorescence
(XRF) spectrometers and scanners are routinely employed
to give a detailed analysis of the chemical composition
of soils, pigments, calcite, limestone, plaster, ash, etc.,
without the need to take samples. One major advantage
of handheld devices is that such instruments avoid a
reliance on off-site laboratories where samples previously
had to be sent for analysis, often causing months
of delay.

Excavation
So far, we have discovered sites and mapped as many of
their surface and subsurface features as possible. But,
despite the growing importance of survey, the only way
to check the reliability of surface data, confirm the accuracy
of remote sensing techniques, and actually see what
remains of these sites and obtain dates, is to excavate them.
As mentioned before, survey can tell us a little about a large
area, but only excavation can tell us a great deal about a
relatively small area.
Excavation retains its central role in fieldwork because
it yields the most reliable evidence for the two main kinds
of information archaeologists are interested in: ( 1) human
activities at a particular period in the past; and ( 2) changes
in those activities from period to period. Very broadly
speaking, contemporary activities take place horizontally
in space, whereas changes in those activities occur vertically
through time. It is this distinction between horizontal
"slices of time" and vertical sequences through time that
forms the basis of most excavation methodology.
3,57 The complexity of stratification varies with the type of site.
This hypothetical section through an urban deposit indicates
the kind of complicated stratigraphy, in both vertical and
horizontal dimensions, that the archaeologist can encounter.
There may be few undisturbed stratified layers. The chances
of finding preserved organic material increase as one
approaches the water table, near which deposits
may be waterlogged.
present ground
surface
natural
soil level
drain
intact stratification
preserved organic material
In the horizontal dimension, archaeologists demonstrate
contemporaneity that activities did indeed
occur at the same time by proving to their satisfaction
through excavation that artifacts and features are found
in association in an undisturbed context. Of course, as
we saw in Chapter 2, there are many formation processes
that may disturb this primary context. One of the main
purposes of the survey and remote sensing procedures
outlined in the earlier sections is to select for excavation
sites, or areas within sites, that are reasonably undisturbed.
On a single-period site, such as an East African
early human campsite, this is vital if human behavior at
the camp is to be reconstructed at all accurately. But on
a multi-period site, such as a long-lived European town
or Near Eastern tell, finding large areas of undisturbed
deposits will be almost impossible. Here archaeologists
have to try to reconstruct during and after excavation
just what disturbance there has been and then decide
how to interpret it. Oearly, adequate records must be
made as excavation progresses if the task of interpretation
is to be undertaken with any chance of success. In
the vertical dimension, archaeologists analyze changes
through time by the study of stratigraphy.

On the Paleolithic site, for example, one has some
hope of uncovering all the structures and recording the
exact position or provenience, vertically and horizontally,
of each and every artifact. On the urban site, one has no
chance of doing this, given time and funding constraints.
Instead, one has to adopt a sampling strategy (see box,
p. 80) and only key artifacts such as coins (important for
dating purposes: see p. 140) will have their provenience
recorded with three-dimensional precision, the remainder
being allocated simply to the layer and perhaps the grid
square in which they were found.
One should note, however, that we have already reintroduced
the idea of the vertical and horizontal dimensions.
These are as crucial to the methods of excavation as they
are to the principles behind excavation. Broadly speaking,
one can divide excavation techniques into:
1 those that emphasize the vertical dimension, by
cutting into deep deposits to reveal stratiﬁcation;
2 those that emphasize the horizontal dimension, by
opening up large areas of a particular layer to reveal
the spatial relationships between artifacts and
features in that layer.
Most excavators employ a combination of both strategies,
but there are different ways of achieving this. All presuppose
that the site has been surveyed and a grid of squares
created to aid in accurate recording.
Shovel Test Pits (STPs) and Evaluation Trenches. These
are often the first form of excavation undertaken at an
archaeological site. The purpose of these small pits is to
gain a preliminary idea of what lies beneath the surface.
They are often dug into the ground at consistent distances
from each other. In Europe, they are traditionally in the
form of 1-m (3-ft.) squares; but in some parts of North
America, small round holes are dug, about the diameter
of a dinner plate, and less than 1 m (3 ft.) deep. These pits
help disclose what an area has to offer, and help identify
the extent of a possible site, while analysis and plotting of
the material retrieved from them by screening (sieving)
of the soil can produce maps showing areas with high
concentrations of different kinds of artifacts. This method
is commonly employed as part of site surveys for CRM
projects in areas of the USA with poor surface visibility,
such as forested areas of the East Coast.
Evaluation trenches have often proved to be more effective
than 1-m (3-ft.) squares. These trenches, c. 20 50 m
(65 164 ft.) long, are usually laid out on a grid, or target
specific features that have already been detected by other
methods (such as air photography or geophysical survey),
and expose a certain percentage of the area, typically 2 to
5 percent. Thousands of such trenches are dug in Britain
alone every year.
Site Grids and Open-Area Excavation. The site grid is laid
out from a "datum," which is simply a selected location that
serves as a reference point for all horizontal and vertical
measurements taken at the site, so that the site can be
accurately mapped and the exact location of any artifact or
feature can be recorded in three dimensions. Increasingly,
the use of a Total Station (see p. 96) is removing the need
to lay out a grid. The Wheeler box-grid seeks to satisfy both
vertical and horizontal requirements by retaining intact
balks of earth between the squares of the grid so that different
layers can be traced and correlated across the site
in vertical proﬁles. Once the general extent and layout of
the site have been ascertained, some of the balks can be
removed and the squares joined into an open excavation
to expose any features (such as a mosaic ﬂoor) that are
of special interest. The box-grid method is still widely
used in parts of South Asia where it was introduced by
Wheeler in the 1940s. It remains popular as it enables
large numbers of untrained workers in individual boxes
to be easily supervised by small numbers of staff.
Advocates of open-area excavation, such as the English
excavator Philip Barker, criticize the Wheeler method,
arguing that the balks are invariably in the wrong place or
wrongly oriented to illustrate the relationships required
from sections, and that they prevent the distinguishing of
spatial patterning over large areas. It is far better, these
critics say, not to have such permanent or semi-permanent
balks, but to open up large areas and only to cut vertical
sections (at whatever angle is necessary to the main site
grid) where they are needed to elucidate particularly
complex stratigraphic relationships. Apart from these
"running sections," the vertical dimension is recorded
by accurate three-dimensional measurements as the dig
proceeds and reconstructed on paper after the end of
the excavation. The introduction since Wheeler’s day of
more advanced recording methods, including ﬁeld computers,
makes this more demanding open-area method
feasible, and it has become the norm in much of British
archaeology.
The open-area method is particularly effective where
single-period deposits lie near the surface, as for instance
with remains of Native American or European Neolithic
longhouses. Here the time dimension may be represented
by lateral movement (a settlement rebuilt adjacent to,
not on top of, an earlier one) and it is essential to expose
large horizontal areas in order to understand the complex
pattern of rebuilding. Large open-area excavations are
often undertaken in applied or compliance archaeology
(salvage or rescue archaeology) when land is going to be
destroyed otherwise farmers are naturally opposed to
stripping large areas of plow-disturbed soil.
Sometimes, if time and money are short, and structures
lie sufﬁciently close to the surface, the topsoil can simply

Underwater Excavation. Underwater archaeology is generally
considered to have been given its first major impetus
during the winter of 1853 54, when a particularly low
water level in the Swiss lakes exposed enormous quantities
of wooden posts, pottery, and other artifacts. It was
significantly developed in the 1960s during Honor Frost’s
underwater excavation of Gelidonya in Turkey (see box,
p. 33). The method has examined a wide variety of sites,
including wells, sinkholes, and springs (e.g. the great sacrificial
well at Chichén ltzá, Mexico); submerged lakeside
settlements; and marine sites ranging from shipwrecks to
sunken harbors (e.g. Caesarea, Israel) and drowned cities
(e.g. Port Royal, Jamaica).
Submersible craft, scuba-diving gear and rebreathers,
and "exosuits" enable divers to work for ever longer periods,
reaching sites at previously impossible depths. As a result,
the pace and scale of discovery have greatly increased. More
than 1,000 shipwrecks are known in shallow Mediterranean
waters, but recent explorations using deep-sea submersibles,
such as miniature unmanned submarines (remotely
operated vehicles ROVs and autonomous underwater
vehicles AUVs) with sonar, high-powered lighting, and
video cameras, have begun to find Roman wrecks at depths of
up to 850 m (2,790 ft.). Two Phoenician wrecks packed with
amphorae (storage jars), discovered off the coast of Israel,
are the oldest vessels ever found in the deep sea.
Excavation underwater is complex and expensive
(not to mention the highly demanding post-excavation
conservation and analytical work that is also required).
Once under way, the excavation may involve shifting
vast quantities of sediment, and recording and removing
bulky objects as diverse as storage jars, metal ingots, and
cannon. George Bass, founder of the Institute of Nautical
Archaeology in Texas, and others have developed many
helpful devices, such as baskets attached to balloons to
raise objects, and air lifts (suction hoses) to remove sediment.
If the vessel’s hull survives at all, a 3D plan must be
made so that specialists can later reconstruct the overall
form and lines, either on paper or as a model or full-size
replica (see box, pp. 112 13). In some rare cases, such as
that of England’s Mary Rose (sixteenth century ce), preservation
is sufficiently good for the remains of the hull to
be raised funds permitting.
Excavating sunken vessels reveals not only how they
were constructed but also aspects of shipboard life,
cargoes, trade routes, early metallurgy, and glassmaking.
We look in more detail at two projects: the Red Bay Wreck,
off Canada (see box, pp. 112 13), and the Uluburun Wreck,
off Turkey (pp. 374 75).